The future of biomedical industry
Qwest Science Sabin
Qwest Science Sabin
Feb 18, 2017·3 min read
from https://medium.com/@sciQwest/the-future-of-biomedical-industry-57576130db9a
The Center for Biotechnology at the Kellogg School of Management under the direction of Prof. Löffler has published a white paper on the biomedical industry transformation (Loffler, 2007). In particular, they foresee that the demand for innovative and personalized treatment is escalating with a growing aging population in developed countries and with the shift in prevalence of chronic disease within large population of developed countries. There are therefore great opportunities for biomedical companies capable to develop cost effective innovative medicine that are affordable both for emerging markets and for developed markets constrained by governments pricing pressures.
Innovation is at the crossroad of scientific disciplines, iteratively looking at fundamental and applied science and mixing actors from public and private institutions. This constitutes a blurred ecosystem where forces converge into a massive creative and productive engine. This convergence characterized by overlapping shifts and paradigm changes produce increasingly valuable biomedical innovation and new therapies domains (molecular biology, genomics, sequencing, …). However, this fast moving environment obliges a constant adaptation and progress of people and technics in order to stay competitive. To sustain the productivity of the biomedical industry innovation engine, it is also essential to provide continuous funding at every stage, from fundamental research to development and market access. The competition of projects, to access those different sources of public and private financing, determines therefore their innovative value.
Despite the convergence of knowledge and methodologies, the industry remains fragmented. The biomedical industry supply chain is split between specialized actors who’s business is constantly evolving to capture the most value from their innovation. The intellectual property rights are key for those company valuation and potential revenues through licensing at premium prices. The biomedical supply chain has also a complex end user market. The biomedical products are addressed to patients and through their medical doctors whereas payment is made by insurers and health department of governments.
We expect to see companies developing competitive advantage through integration and cross-fertilizations of biotechnology with medical device technology. The biomedical industry will sustain its innovation relying on solid knowledge of disease biology and understanding of healthcare providers and payers needs, while designing better personalized, predictive, and preventive medicine. That is why, beyond efficacy and safety, new medicines will require to address niche population of patients with pharmacoeconomic added value. Cost-effectiveness of the medicine is linked to the predictability and preventability of the disease. Another factor to measure cost-effectiveness is the optimization of the supply chain for low cost manufacturing, reduction of research and development expenses and wide distribution channels.
The biomedical industry is divided in four main segments: the pharmaceutical firms, the biotechnology companies, the medical device companies and the diagnostics companies. This industry sector is characterized by highly qualified human resource, financial instruments covering sunk costs associated with long time technology development, a complex consumer value chain mixing health providers, patients and insurance payers and regulatory-ethical-political constrained environment around market approval and reimbursement price.
Breakthroughs in biomedical industry come from both scientific and societal innovations. In term of scientific innovation, there is a growing attention on the convergence of research disciplines like chemistry/material sciences, biology, engineering and computer science. The societal innovation addresses problems like patient treatment efficacy and therapies combination, hospitalization workflow efficiency and medical expenses reduction.
We observe a blend of practices bridging between pharmaceutical, biotechnology, medical device and diagnostics industry segments. The biomedical start-ups have been flexible enough to adopt those new business models that emphasize the molecules discovery, while the traditional pharmaceutical firms have organized part of their R&D operation around externalization to focus on the implementation. A recent survey from AT.Kearney divides the innovation chain in two separated business models:
· Discover molecules powerhouses: turning scientific vision into products
· Implementer companies: developing, registering, and marketing medicines
Along this two stages R&D value chain, the venture capital plays a major role by enabling creation of value through the financing of start-ups at the discovery stage. Funding contributes to improve the biomedical technology until they achieve their clinical proof of concept to be licensed out to the pharmaceutical industry.
Therefore there are three innovations lever the biomedical industry is focusing on:
1. Improve discovery throughout a structured collaborative effort
2. Increase therapeutic value and medical benefit by targeting the right population
3. Address cost effectiveness and demonstrate global healthcare expenses reduction